Spring REST Docs is a tool developed by the Spring Pivotal team for
generating REST documentation directly from your automated tests.
Like mentioned in the section on test as documentation,
the advantage of generating documentation from tests is that when a test fails,
so does the documentation generation.
So you can be confident that documentation generated is accurate.
During this demo,
we're going to look at using Spring REST Docs to generate
documentation from an automated test.
As is often the case, our first step is updating our Maven POM file.
In this case,
we need to add the dependencies
spring-restdocs-core and spring-restdocs-mockmvc.
In the TestCustomerController class we wrote in the
module on component integration testing,
we're going to update it to produce some documentation.
The first step is to add the AutoConfigureRestDocs annotation,
and give first docs a directory it's generated documentation to.
Next,
we're going to add some markup to
testSuccessfulFindAllCustomers to produce documentation.
To save some time, I will just copy in a completed example.
Looking through the added code,
the first piece to take note of is the document customers.
Spring REST Docs generates a lot of snippets,
and the identifier, in this case customers,
tells REST Docs where to send the snippet under target generated docs.
Next, I'm declaring the responseFields.
As I'm returning a list,
I am using a square brackets notation followed by the field name.
If I was returning a single element,
I would simple use the name of the field itself.
I can then give a description of the field.
I went ahead and did this for all the fields being returned.
If I run a test, it should pass.
Hmm, failure.
Let's look at what happened.
So this again is showing why REST Docs is helpful.
It will actually validate to make sure that output
matches what you're documenting.
In this case,
I used dateOfLastStay instead of what is actually to be
printed out in the actual JSON of lastStayDate.
If I update that, I run, and my test passes.
If I go check the target generated docs folder,
I can see what REST Docs is producing.
REST Docs produces several different files.
Example request in different notations, the request being sent,
and the response being returned.
REST Docs uses the AsciiDoc markup notation.
Going through how the notation works is beyond the
scope of this module; however,
I provided a link to the AsciiDoc home page at the end of this demo.
These docs aren't in a very useful state right now.
Let's change that.
First, a bit of a sidebar.
Because I am using JUnit 5 in this demo, I must update the surefire plugin.
I need to update the version of the surefire plugin to 2.
19 or later.
I will also need to add some JUnit 5 dependencies.
Also, as of the recording of this module,
the Maven failsafe plugin isn't compatible with JUnit5,
so I've commented that out.
Back to Spring REST Docs,
I have added the asciidoctor plugin and configured it to read the
generated-docs directory where REST docs is sending all of its output.
I'm also telling it to use the index.
adoc for the source document.
By default, the asciidoctor plugin will look under the folder src/main/asciidoc.
Under that directory in the project, I have added the index.
adoc file.
In this file,
I am telling it to display some of the files REST Docs is generating,
specifically the fields being returned from the customer's endpoint,
and an example request and response.
We can see the output if we run the Maven install.
Under target there is index.
html.
If we open it up, we get some nice-looking output from REST Docs.
Let's add another request in response.
Under testSuccessSearchCustomersByFNameLName, I'll again add Rest Docs mockup.
Note I am also now including request parameters, as I'm running a search query.
In index.
adoc, I will tell it to look for the new files REST Docs will generate.
If we run the Maven install and refresh in index.
html, it gives us the updated documentation.
REST Docs is a great way of getting additional value
from the automated tests we write.
Instead of just validating our code,
now there is accurate documentation you can give business
analysts or potential consumers of your service. For additional reading on the AsciiDoc notation, please visit this page.